hi
everybody this is just a quick video
about dark comets which have been in the
news recently so what are dark comets
what's what this all
about well there's a new class of near
Earth object so an object in the solar
system that swings past the Earth at
relatively close distances on its path
and it's Journey around the
Sun these are similar to asteroids
perhaps 10 to 100 m
across but they move on more Comet like
orbits in some cases but they don't have
tails so normal comets would have a tail
these are tailess objects and causing a
little bit of a
mystery this is a typical asteroid
that's been visited recently by the Lucy
mission in uh 203 uh 2023 sorry um it's
U orbiting around in the main asteroid
belt the main body just under 800 M
across so fairly modest for an
asteroid but curiously it's found to be
a contact binary the second small lump
that you can see at the bottom of the
picture there is a separate Rock 220 M
across that has been in orbit around it
but it's just just gently touching the
surface there as the two rotate now um
and this is a possible member of the
Flora asteroid family asteroids seem to
occur in collections groups or families
which are grouped together because their
orbits are similar they have the same
orbital tilts the same uh maximum and
minimum distance from the Sun the same
orbital eccentricity so equal elliptical
and they're moving in these families or
groups all strung out along the same
orbit and they probably all arose from a
great Collision of a larger parent body
where an enormous Smash Up occurred
between uh two objects colliding and
created a shower of fragments and this
and the asteroid flora and about 13,000
other asteroids all seem to come from
the same
place so this a fairly typical looking
asteroid it's a rough collection of
rocks that have come together some large
ones some small ones you can see it's
really in the process of merging with
the uh large lump that's uh sat at the
bottom there so fairly typical comets on
the other hand look very different this
is hail Bop from
1997 they've been often been described
as a dirty snowball with a tail of dust
and gas where the heat of the sun is
boiling Material off and it streams out
away from the Sun carried down Wind by
the solar wind the stream of particles
from the
Sun and those particles also can ionize
some of the gas and that's what's
happening here with hail poop the blue
ion tail is ionized material where the
radiation and highly energetic particles
in the solar wind of stripped electrons
from some of the atoms made them
electrically charged and then because of
the sun's magnetic field those
um magnetic care field deflects electric
charges and so the charged particles in
the tail get swept aside onto a
different
path so comets and asteroids very
different looking objects so what about
these dark comets well actually there
seem to be two classes of them inner
dark
comets that are in nearly circular
orbits so more like an asteroid and are
smaller tens of meters in diameter and
orbiting
around in close proximity to the Earth
roughly one astronomical unit the Earth
Sun
distance and uh there by classed as near
Earth objects and there's a number of
them shown in the right hand part part
of the diagram so they swing around in
these nearly circular orbits at about
One AU they've all got these catalog
numbers which is the year and then some
letters and numbers that tell you which
object we're actually talking
about and then on the left hand side of
the diagram we've got outer dark comets
whose orbit goes rather
further um and uh these swing out into
the outer solar system on on much more
elliptical trajectories and uh they go
out and perhaps are associated with the
gravity of Jupiter having an influence
on them as their orbits seem to go out
as far as Jupiter and then dive back in
and these tend to be larger now that may
be because being on average further away
we find it easier to find only the
larger members of the outer dark comets
and there may be yet more smaller ones
to find
now some of these objects have also had
their Origins from Beyond the solar
system and we'll see one particularly
famous case just in this little
talk so this all kicked off really when
in 2003 an object 2003 RM was located
and in tracking the orbit of it it's
important to track near Earth asteroids
in case any of them come too close to
the Earth and risk colliding with it of
course um see the dinosaurs for details
but in tracking 2003
RM what we found was that it was off
course it was orbiting in a manner which
we normally see in comets but we don't
normally see in asteroids but of course
this one is showing absolutely no sign
of a tail so we would classify as an
asteroid not a comet
very unusual
behavior what causes the Comets to go
off course we will talk about in a
minute and we can understand that much
more easily so that was 201 uh 16 when
this particular object was recognized as
having a a strange orbit and then you
might remember omua mua in
2017 perhaps the most famous dark Comet
of all this was a visitor from a another
star system it came in whizzing through
the solar system on a high angle from up
above the plane of the solar system on a
very much hyperbolic trajectory so not
captured by the Sun's gravity at all an
open-ended orbit that would go out and
uh disappear forever never to return
and we didn't see it until after the
close approach it was on its way out of
the the solar
system when we detected it so had this
been on a trajectory to hit the earth uh
we would not have seen it coming it was
coming from a direction that just was in
the day side of the sky at the time and
so uh we were not able to track it once
we did see it all we could really see
was a single point of light and follow
it across the sky and work out its orbit
and again we spotted that its trajectory
the path through the solar system did
not seem to be what we expected it was
getting changed as though it were a
comet what do I mean by that well comets
move because they get warmed by the sun
they boil off all that material that
makes the tail and in the process
they're absorbing a lot of energy from
the Sun and that pushes on them and
deflects them so their orbits are not
purely determined by gravity and so what
we think is happening with these
asteroids that are showing this
non-gravitational trajectory where they
don't seem to quite obey the laws of
Isaac Newton and
Kepler is that they are emitting jets of
gas not so much dust or we would see it
but just gas so the heat from the Sun is
boiling off volatile gases ammonia
methane water vapor p ws and this out
gassing on the sunw side where the heat
is hitting them is creating a
differential thrust that is acting like
a rocket motor and deflecting their path
around the Sun so that they seem to
follow this non-gravitational trajectory
as it's called um and we think that this
was what was happening with omua mua in
that case I think it was probably
hydrogen very very cold in deep space
cold enough for hydrogen to form as a
solid and this was being released due to
the slight warming of coming into the
solar system is enough to create this
jet effect and push the uh object off
its
course of course at the time a lot of
people started making up wild and
outlandish claims incl including one of
two fairly reputable scientists talking
about the fact that perhaps omua mua
might be an alien spacecraft but uh I
think that's rather fanciful and it was
discussed as to whether we should send a
probe to it now the problem was of
course it was already leaving the solar
system so this probe would have had to
have been put together pretty rapidly
and then tried to catch up with omua mua
which was moving very fast had escape
velocity from the Sun after all so it
was going at a high rate and uh space
probe would have had to travel very
rapidly to catch up with it
now what we do know about a lot of these
dark comets is that they contain a lot
of these volatile chemicals in
particular they probably contain a lot
of water Frozen up and it's that boiling
off that is creating the thrust and it's
highly probable that this water in
earlier generations of dark comets that
have come Crashing Down to Earth has
been the source and the delivery
mechanism for delivering
water to Earth so very interesting from
the point of view of where the Earth got
its
oceans and we think that they contain
quite a lot of organic material other
carbon compounds that could well have
been responsible for seeding the early
progress and formation of life on Earth
so fascinating from that point of view
and on the right here I've just shown a
sort of picture of a few of the
molecules types of uh chemicals that
have been detected on the asteroid ryugu
and in fact also on the asteroid benu as
well these seem to be related objects
formed in the early stages of the solar
system and unmodified for 4 and a half
billion years
since and what we have is that these
are containing a lot of these molecules
as well as a high water content and
highly likely to be in their our own
right these are just large versions of
the dark comets and uh these are
probably one of the sources of all of
this material on Earth and so I think
actually these dark comets are of great
interest especially the ones that are
crossing from one star system to another
and uh I hope to hear more about it as
we go forward so thanks very much and
I'll bring this one to a close here